+============+
| 11/03/2017 |
+============+

Basic Assumptions
=================
The basic assumption of my approach is that all authors are influenced
by what they read.  This influence can be felt in a variety of ways:
  1.) Actual transfer of topics.
  2.) Word choices
  3.) Phrase structure and choice
  5.) Style Elements

These influence factors can be readily seen by a human, in that we can
intuitively identify things that "sound like" a specific author or
book.  However, in terms of the actual text they are latent variables
which must be pulled out.

The basic assumption of my model is that these latent factors make
themselves known by exercising influence over the choices of words
used within phrases.  This provides the model with a tuneable
parameter of n for the length of phrases to be explored.

My hypothesis is that simple n-gram analysis is insufficient to
capture these interactions.  That is, influence is best modeled
through covariant properties of the n-gram phrases.  Related keyword
phrases may vary at the same rates of other phrases (such as
supporting phrases or conclusive statements.)  Tensor decomposition
will capture these relationships by exploring tensors in polyadic
form. 


Polyadic Properties of the Influence Model
==========================================
PARAFAC, or Canonical Polyadic Decomposition, models the latent
factors of the influence model. It does this by separating the tensor
it to factors which are well correlated internally, but not correlated
with each other.  Thus, each polyadic factor represents a covariant
structure within the object counts of the documents.

Moreover, because the covariant vectors which result from the polyadic
decomposition form Tensors of the same order and shape as the original
document tensor, these factors can be interpreted as clusters of
covariant n-grams.  

*Note: Make a proof of the idea that this tensor is necessarily
covariant.  Should not be too difficult.*

The relationships between the n-grams is in no way influenced by their
proximity.  These are counts that are related to one another, and so
are also contain latent information about the document structure.

Explained Variance
==================
The variance to be explained by the model is the frequency of n-grams.
Influencing factors are latent explanatory factors which explain the
variance of the n-grams, and therefore the variance of adjacent words
in n-gram sequences.
